Our overarching goal is to improve the care of patients with craniomaxillofacial deformities by overcoming roadblocks to achieve objective diagnosis of facial deformities and efficient surgical planning. Both processes need three-dimensional (3D) models of facial structures and anatomical landmarks. Nonetheless, no current method can accurately generate 3D models of the various facial structures and correctly identify their landmarks without errors. In the previous grant, we developed SkullEngine, a deep learning model that segments maxillofacial cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) scans and digitizes landmarks. However, manual edits are still needed to fix the errors and busy clinicians cannot devote the time. 

Our premise is that the primary impediment to further progress is the deficiency of extensive training datasets for deep learning. However, the pooling of multi-institutional databases for sufficient examples is hampered by integration complexities, privacy regulations (especially for face imagery), and the significant cost associated with curating accurately labeled data. In addition to establishing a federation of multiple institutes for well-coordinated efforts on data collection and labeling, we propose to develop a novel deep learning framework, SkullEngine+, by utilizing the latest advancements in artificial intelligence (AI), including Vision Transformers, Pre-Training, and Federated Learning. This project will also address the unmet clinical need for an objective, accurate test to assess jaw deformities. However, significant challenges need to be overcome to achieve our objectives. The challenges include: 1) directly extending the existing pre-training technique for 3D CBCT volumes would be prohibitive due to the limited computing memories and also the high communication cost of large AI model between client sites; 2) AI models trained with classic federated learning do not work well with heterogeneous data acquired by different CBCT scanners; and 3) the current cephalometric measurements do not accurately evaluate the attributes required for jaw deformity diagnosis. To overcome those roadblocks, in Aim 1, we propose to develop and validate a novel efficient pre-training technology to utilize large-scale multi-center unlabeled data. In Aim 2, we will improve the performance of CBCT segmentation and landmark digitization in the heterogeneous multi-center data through locally adapted parameter-efficient federated learning. Aim 3 is to create and validate an AI pipeline for automatic jaw deformity identification. Our record in the initial grant period and the strong preliminary studies have built a solid foundation for accomplishing the proposed aims of this project. 

Clinicians envision the day when they can visualize separate 3D models of their patients' faces during their visits. They also dream about getting accurate and clinically useful cephalometric analyses. The solid technical innovations of this project will impact the care of patients with facial deformities as well as other fields, such as orthodontics, cleft care, radiation image analysis, and radiational oncology. 